# parks-capstone-census
An excerpt from a guide to assist the Pittsburgh Parks Conservancy in their effort to prioritize public investment needs on a park-by-park basis using analyses and visualizations of data characterizing the demographics, environment, public health, crime, and other attributes of Pittsburgh parks and their surrounding walkshed areas.

As candidates for a Master of Science in Quantitative Economics at the University of Pittsburgh, we have developed an analytical acumen that enables us to harness data to bolster public utility. For our capstone project, we dedicated the spring semester to analyzing data for the Pittsburgh Parks Conservancy and uncovering patterns and disparities affecting Pittsburgh’s public parks and their surrounding communities, or “walksheds.” After rigorous quantitative analyses of statistics describing relevant factors including demographic data, environmental metrics, public health outcomes, and crime rates, we produced this document and the accompanying datasets and visualizations as a guide for the Conservancy to quantify dimensions of community need on a park-by-park basis. This project is a resource to enable the Conservancy to make data-driven decisions in its efforts to allocate park budgets, secure public and private investment, and engage stakeholders across the communities of its footprint effectively and equitably.

We analyzed data from an array of public sector sources from federal bodies like the U.S. Census Bureau, the Center for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC), the U.S. Forest Service, and the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) to local entities like the Pittsburgh Water and Sewer Authority (PWSA) and the Pittsburgh Police Department (PPD). We also cross-referenced private data from the Pew Research Center and Washington University in St. Louis to corroborate our findings. We targeted variables that offered descriptions of the population and environment of the walksheds, such that we could concisely characterize the demographics, environment, health, and crime of a given walkshed. After downloading and cleaning data into concise datasets preserving selected relevant variables, we used the technique of areal interpolation to attach data from geographic identifiers like Census tracts to the walksheds. After attachment and additional calculations scaling and standardizing the data, we produced datasets that displayed selected variables as raw counts, percentages, and z-scores.  

We employed a technical toolkit that included R packages sf, ggplot2, and tmap, geographic information systems software QGIS, and Python packages seaborn and matplotlib to analyze and visualize our cleaned and attached datasets. We developed indexes to model relative racial diversity of walksheds, analyzed the correlations between selected relevant variables, segmented parks based on relationships between tree canopy, acreage, sports facilities, and other factors, and broke down violent and nonviolent crime in walksheds and parks over time.

These files are one-quarter of the project dedicated to cleaning, visualization, and analysis of U.S. Census data.
